Eos, Vol. 92, No. 2, 11 January 2011

Observation of Magnetic Fields
Generated by Tsunamis
PAGES 13–14
Tsunamis produce perturbations in the
Earth’s magnetic field by electro­magnetic
induction. Recent deployments of highly
accurate magnetometers and the exceptionally deep solar minimum provided ideal conditions to observe these small signals from
the tsunami resulting from the strong Chilean
earthquake on 27 February 2010. Magnetic
observatory measurements on Easter Island,
3500 kilometers west of the epicenter, show
a periodic signal of 1 nanotesla, coincident
in time with recordings from the local tide
gauge. The detection of these magnetic signals represents a milestone in understanding
­t sunami-​­induced electromagnetic effects.

Magnetic Signals From Chile’s
27 February 2010 Tsunami
Movement of electrically conducting seawater through the geomagnetic field generates an electromotive force that induces
electric fields, currents, and secondary magnetic fields [Sanford, 1971]. This dynamo
effect (also known as motional induction)
is proportional to ocean velocity and the
strength of the vertical component of the
ambient magnetic field. Motional induction in the ocean by tides has long been
observed in land measurements [Larsen,
1968] and satellite measurements [Tyler
et al., 2003] of magnetic fields.
Tsunamis have similarly been predicted to
produce observable magnetic fields [Larsen,
1971; Tyler, 2005]. However, these have so far
eluded detection, due to the weakness of the
­
signal, the lack of accurate high​­resolution
magnetic measurements at the right locations, and the rarity of tsunami occurrence.
­Ultralow-​­frequency (ULF) waves originating in the Earth’s magnetosphere can exhibit
frequency characteristics similar to those
stemming from tsunamis, further complicating the identification of ­t sunami-​­generated
magnetic fields.
The recent magnitude 8.8 earthquake
off the Chilean coast (27 February 2010
at 0634:14 UTC, 35.846°S, 72.719°W) produced a moderate tsunami that traversed
the Pacific Ocean westward (Figure 1).
Exceptionally quiet magnetic conditions
on that day provided a unique opportunity
to observe these weak signals. Scientists
from the University of Colorado at Boulder and the Institut de Physique du Globe
de Paris examined magnetic measurements (see http://​­geomag​.org/​­info/​­t sunami​
.html) at three observatories. The newly constructed Easter Island observatory (code
IPM), located about 3500 kilometers west
of the epicenter, provides a measurement
of the magnetic field vector every second.
Farther west is Pamatai (PPT, with samples

taken every second) on Tahiti, while the
Huancayo observatory (HUA, samples taken
every 60 seconds) is situated north of the
event, in Peru. IPM shows a periodic signal
of 1 nanotesla in the vertical component of
the magnetic field (Z) starting at 1135 UTC.
The other two observatories do not show
concurrent variations, indicating a local origin of the signal. Commencement of the signal at IPM is coincident with the arrival time
of the tsunami predicted by the U.S. National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s
(NOAA) Center for Tsunami Research.

Implications of the Magnetic Observation
Sea level variation around Easter Island
resulting from the tsunami can be roughly
estimated [Tyler, 2005] from the product
of the ­t sunami-​­generated magnetic signal
(±1 nanotesla) and the average depth of
the water column (3000 meters in a 2° × 2°
area), divided by the vertical component of
the ambient magnetic field (19,000 nano­
teslas). Inferred amplitudes of 15 centimeters using this method are consistent with
the wave height predicted by the method
of splitting tsunami (MOST) model [Titov
and Gonzalez, 1997] and with bottom pressure variations seen by NOAA’s ­Deep-​­ocean
Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis
(DART) buoy 51406, located 2650 kilometers northwest of Easter Island (see http://​
­geomag​.org/​­info/​­t sunami​.html).

The observation of these magnetic signals
has important implications for understanding ­tsunami-​­induced electromagnetic effects.
For example, the magnetic observations may
be used to calibrate the forward modeling
algorithms to accurately predict the ocean
­flow–­related magnetic signals. The characteristics of the observed tsunami signals also may
be used to search for tsunami signals in historic magnetic records. A recent study [Manoj
et al., 2010] found that tsunamis could also
induce observable electric potentials in deepsea cables that might be used to detect the tsunami flows. However, the disturbances from
the Earth’s magnetosphere could restrict the
practical utility of tsunami electromagnetic
monitoring to periods of low solar activity.

Acknowledgments
The geomagnetic data used in this study
are from observatories operated by the
Bureau Central de Magnétisme Terrestre,
France (IPM and PPT; http://​w ww​.­bcmt​.fr),
the Dirección Meteorológica de Chile (IPM),
and the Instituto Geofísico del Peru (HUA).
We thank ­INTERMAGNET (International RealTime Magnetic Observatory Network) for promoting high standards of magnetic observatory practice (http://​w ww​.­intermagnet​.org).
The DART data are obtained from NOAA’s
National Data Buoy Center for DART data.
The base map in Figure 1 is from NOAA’s
Center for Tsunami Research.

References
Larsen, J. C. (1968), Electric and magnetic fields
induced by deep sea tides, Geophys. J. Int., 16(1),
47–70, doi:10.1111/­j.1365​-246X​.1968​.­tb07135.x.

Fig. 1. Epicenter and magnetic observatories at Easter Island (IPM), Tahiti’s Pamatai (PPT), and
Peru’s Huancayo (HUA) on the tsunami propagation map. Maximal tsunami amplitude (color
bar) and tsunami arrival time in hours (gray contours) are predicted by the method of splitting
tsunami (MOST) model [Titov and Gonzalez, 1997]. The triangles show the locations of the U.S
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s ­Deep-​­ocean Assessment and Reporting of
Tsunami (DART) buoys, which are numbered by a ­five-​­digit identifier. The mesh along the coast
indicates the fault plane segments used for the tsunami modeling.

Larsen, J. C. (1971), The electromagnetic field of
long and intermediate water waves, J. Mar. Res.,
29(1), 28–45.
Manoj, C., A. Kuvshinov, S. Neetu, and T. Harinarayana (2010), Can undersea voltage measurements detect tsunamis?, Earth Planets Space,
62(3), 353–358, doi:10.5047/​eps​. 2009​.10.001.
Sanford, T. B. (1971), Motionally induced electric
and magnetic fields in the sea, J. Geophys. Res.,
76(15), 3476–3492, doi:10.1029/​JC076i015p03476.

Titov, V. V., and F. I. Gonzalez (1997), Implementation and testing of the method of splitting tsunami (MOST) model, NOAA Tech. Memo., ERL
­PMEL-112, 14 pp.
Tyler, R. H. (2005), A simple formula for estimating
the magnetic fields generated by tsunami flow,
Geophys. Res. Lett., 32, L09608, doi:10.1029/­
2005GL022429.
Tyler, R. H., S. Maus, and H. Lühr (2003), Satellite
observations of magnetic fields due to ocean tid-

NEWS
Scientists Outline Volcanic Ash Risks to Aviation
PAGE 15
The ash clouds that belched out of Iceland’s Eyjafjallajökull volcano last spring
and dispersed over much of Europe, temporarily paralyzing aviation, were vast
smoke signal warnings about the hazard that volcanic ash poses for air traffic around the world. At a 15 December
news briefing at the AGU Fall Meeting in
San Francisco, two experts with the U.S.
Geological Survey (USGS) presented an
overview of the damage airplanes can
sustain from rock ­f ragment– and mineral
fragment–­laden ash, an update on efforts
to mitigate the hazard of ash, and an outline of further measures that are needed to
address the problem.
Between 1953 and 2009, there were 129
reported encounters of aircraft with volcanic ash clouds, according to a newly
released USGS document cited at the briefing. The report, “Encounters of aircraft
with volcanic ash clouds: A compilation
of known incidents, 1953–2009,” by Marianne Guffanti, Thomas Casadevall, and
Karin Budding, indicates that 26 encounters involved significant damage to the airplanes; nine of those incidents resulted in
engine shutdown during flight. The report,
which does not focus on the effects on airplanes of cumulative exposure to dilute
ash and does not include data since 2009,
indicates that “ash clouds continue to pose

substantial risks to safe and efficient air
travel globally.”
At the briefing, Casadevall, a geologist
emeritus with USGS in Denver, Colo., noted
that volcanic ash can be found in the atmosphere at cruising altitudes for jet aircraft
“almost on a daily basis” and that addressing the problem requires strong communication between geologists, meteorologists,
pilots, and air traffic controllers.
He said efforts to address the problem
have been ongoing for several decades.
Nearly half of the world’s 550 historically
active volcanoes now have geophysical
monitoring, compared with about 170 volcanoes monitored in the mid-1980s, he
said. Casadevall also noted other advances,
including improvements in ash trajectory
forecasts that include ash concentration, in
remote sensing of volcanic activity, and in
tracking ash cloud movements.
Marianne Guffanti, a USGS geologist
based in Reston, Va., added that following
the Iceland incident, the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) established
an international volcanic ash task force
to examine the issue of risk mitigation,
including looking at the tolerances of
aircraft introduced to encounters with ash
and how to manage air traffic. She added
that a key issue in the operational conduct
of flights near ash is that it is a very
complicated process to certify engines to
operate in ash.

al flow, Science, 299(5604), 239–241, doi:10.1126/
science​.1078074.
—Chandrasekharan Manoj and Stefan Maus,
Cooperative Institute for Research in Environmental
Sciences, University of Colorado at Boulder; also at
National Geophysical Data Center, NOAA, Boulder,
Colo.; E-mail: manoj.c.nair@noaa.gov; and Arnaud
Chulliat, Institut de Physique du Globe de Paris,
Paris, France

Guffanti also noted at the briefing that
ash dispersion models have a significant
amount of uncertainty—including
information about projected wind fields,
the amount of mass a volcano has erupted,
and the thickness of an ash cloud—and
that there is an effort to better understand
these uncertainties.
Casadevall and Guffanti said other
needs include monitoring more volcanoes with ground-based instruments
because relying on satellite data often is
not sufficient.
In addition, Casadevall said there are
efforts to examine improving the nine
Volcanic Ash Advisory Centers (VAACs)
located around the world, which operate
under ICAO guidelines. He said concerns
include “boundary challenges” and the
need for improved coordination between
contiguous VAACs when an ash cloud
drifts in and out of space managed by different VAACs.
Casadevall added that while some
VAACs—­s uch as those in Anchorage,
Alaska, and Tokyo, Japan—­cover regions
with many active volcanoes and monitor a
number of ash clouds throughout the year,
others—­including those in Buenos Aires,
Argentina, and Toulouse, France—­cover
regions with fewer volcanic ash incidents
and thus do not monitor as many ash
clouds. Some VAACs covering regions with
fewer incidents are “like the football team
that’s only going to play one game a year,”
Casadevall said. “They’ve been on a very
steep learning curve.”
For more information, see http://​pubs​
.usgs​.gov/​­d s/​5 45/.
—Randy Showstack, Staff Writer

23249250, 2011, 2, Downloaded from https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2011EO020002, Wiley Online Library on [05/01/2026]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

Eos, Vol. 92, No. 2, 11 January 2011

